P a g e | 28
Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince – J.K. Rowling
“Then you ought to hold your tongue!” snarled
Bellatrix. “Particularly in present company!”
“ ‘Present company’?” repeated Snape sardonically.
“And what am I to understand by that, Bellatrix?”
“That I don’t trust you, Snape, as you very well
know!”
Narcissa let out a noise that might have been a dry
sob and covered her face with her hands. Snape set
his glass down upon the table and sat back again, his
hands upon the arms of his chair, smiling into
Bellatrix’s glowering face.
“Narcissa, I think we ought to hear what Bellatrix is
bursting to say; it will save tedious interruptions.
Well, continue, Bellatrix,” said Snape. “Why is it that
you do not trust me?”
“A hundred reasons!” she said loudly, striding out
from behind the sofa to slam her glass upon the table.
“Where to start! Where were you when the Dark Lord
fell? Why did you never make any attempt to find him
when he vanished? What have you been doing all
these years that you’ve lived in Dumbledore’s pocket?
Why did you stop the Dark Lord procuring the
Sorcerer’s Stone? Why did you not return at once
when the Dark Lord was reborn? Where were you a
few weeks ago when we battled to retrieve the
prophecy for the Dark Lord? And why, Snape, is
Harry Potter still alive, when you have had him at
your mercy for five years?”
She paused, her chest rising and falling rapidly, the
color high in her cheeks. Behind her, Narcissa sat
motionless, her face still hidden in her hands.
Snape smiled.
P a g e | 29
Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince – J.K. Rowling
“Before I answer you — oh yes, Bellatrix, I am going to answer! You can
carry my words back to the others
who whisper behind my back, and carry false tales of
my treachery to the Dark Lord! Before I answer you, I
say, let me ask a question in turn. Do you really think
that the Dark Lord has not asked me each and every
one of those questions? And do you really think that,
had I not been able to give satisfactory answers, I
would be sitting here talking to you?”
She hesitated.
“I know he believes you, but …”
“You think he is mistaken? Or that I have somehow
hoodwinked him? Fooled the Dark Lord, the greatest
wizard, the most accomplished Legilimens the world
has ever seen?”
Bellatrix said nothing, but looked, for the first time, a
little discomfited. Snape did not press the point. He
picked up his drink again, sipped it, and continued,
“You ask where I was when the Dark Lord fell. I was
where he had ordered me to be, at Hogwarts School of
Witchcraft and Wizardry, because he wished me to
spy upon Albus Dumbledore. You know, I presume,
that it was on the Dark Lord’s orders that I took up
the post?”
She nodded almost imperceptibly and then opened
her mouth, but Snape forestalled her.
“You ask why I did not attempt to find him when he
vanished. For the same reason that Avery, Yaxley, the
Carrows, Greyback, Lucius” — he inclined his head
slightly to Narcissa — “and many others did not
attempt to find him. I believed him finished. I am not
proud of it, I was wrong, but there it is. … If he had
P a g e | 30
Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince – J.K. Rowling
not forgiven we who lost faith at that time, he would have very few
followers left.”
“He’d have me!” said Bellatrix passionately. “I, who
spent many years in Azkaban for him!”
“Yes, indeed, most admirable,” said Snape in a bored
voice. “Of course, you weren’t a lot of use to him in
prison, but the gesture was undoubtedly fine —”
“Gesture!” she shrieked; in her fury she looked
slightly mad. “While I endured the dementors, you
remained at Hogwarts, comfortably playing
Dumbledore’s pet!”
“Not quite,” said Snape calmly. “He wouldn’t give me
the Defense Against the Dark Arts job, you know.
Seemed to think it might, ah, bring about a relapse …
tempt me into my old ways.”
“This was your sacrifice for the Dark Lord, not to
teach your favorite subject?” she jeered. “Why did you
stay there all that time, Snape? Still spying on
Dumbledore for a master you believed dead?”
“Hardly,” said Snape, “although the Dark Lord is
pleased that I never deserted my post: I had sixteen
years of information on Dumbledore to give him when
he returned, a rather more useful welcome-back
present than endless reminiscences of how
unpleasant Azkaban is. …”
“But you stayed —”
“Yes, Bellatrix, I stayed,” said Snape, betraying a hint
of impatience for the first time. “I had a comfortable
job that I preferred to a stint in Azkaban. They were
rounding up the Death Eaters, you know.
Dumbledore’s protection kept me out of jail; it was
P a g e | 31
Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince – J.K. Rowling
most convenient and I used it. I repeat: The Dark
Lord does not complain that I stayed, so I do not see
why you do.
“I think you next wanted to know,” he pressed on, a
little more loudly, for Bellatrix showed every sign of
interrupting, “why I stood between the Dark Lord and
the Sorcerer’s Stone. That is easily answered. He did
not know whether he could trust me. He thought, like
you, that I had turned from faithful Death Eater to
Dumbledore’s stooge. He was in a pitiable condition,
very weak, sharing the body of a mediocre wizard. He
did not dare reveal himself to a former ally if that ally
might turn him over to Dumbledore or the Ministry. I
deeply regret that he did not trust me. He would have
returned to power three years sooner. As it was, I saw
only greedy and unworthy Quirrell attempting to steal
the stone and, I admit, I did all I could to thwart him.”
Bellatrix’s mouth twisted as though she had taken an
unpleasant dose of medicine.
“But you didn’t return when he came back, you didn’t
fly back to him at once when you felt the Dark Mark
burn —”
“Correct. I returned two hours later. I returned on
Dumbledore’s orders.”
“On Dumbledore’s — ?” she began, in tones of
outrage.
“Think!” said Snape, impatient again. “Think! By
waiting two hours, just two hours, I ensured that I
could remain at Hogwarts as a spy! By allowing
Dumbledore to think that I was only returning to the
Dark Lord’s side because I was ordered to, I have
been able to pass information on Dumbledore and the
Order of the Phoenix ever since! Consider, Bellatrix:
P a g e | 32
Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince – J.K. Rowling
The Dark Mark had been growing stronger for
months. I knew he must be about to return, all the
Death Eaters knew! I had plenty of time to think
about what I wanted to do, to plan my next move, to
escape like Karkaroff, didn’t I?
“The Dark Lord’s initial displeasure at my lateness
vanished entirely, I assure you, when I explained that
I remained faithful, although Dumbledore thought I
was his man. Yes, the Dark Lord thought that I had
left him forever, but he was wrong.”
“But what use have you been?” sneered Bellatrix.
“What useful information have we had from you?”
“My information has been conveyed directly to the
Dark Lord,” said Snape. “If he chooses not to share it
with you —”
“He shares everything with me!” said Bellatrix, firing
up at once. “He calls me his most loyal, his most
faithful —”
“Does he?” said Snape, his voice delicately inflected to
suggest his disbelief. “Does he still, after the fiasco at the Ministry?”
“That was not my fault!” said Bellatrix, flushing. “The
Dark Lord has, in the past, entrusted me with his
most precious — if Lucius hadn’t —”
“Don’t you dare — don’t you dare blame my
husband!” said Narcissa, in a low and deadly voice,
looking up at her sister.
“There is no point apportioning blame,” said Snape
smoothly. “What is done, is done.”
P a g e | 33
Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince – J.K. Rowling
“But not by you!” said Bellatrix furiously. “No, you were once again absent
while the rest of us ran
dangers, were you not, Snape?”
“My orders were to remain behind,” said Snape.
“Perhaps you disagree with the Dark Lord, perhaps
you think that Dumbledore would not have noticed if
I had joined forces with the Death Eaters to fight the
Order of the Phoenix? And — forgive me — you speak
of dangers … you were facing six teenagers, were you
not?”
“They were joined, as you very well know, by half of
the Order before long!” snarled Bellatrix. “And, while
we are on the subject of the Order, you still claim you
cannot reveal the whereabouts of their headquarters,
don’t you?”
“I am not the Secret-Keeper; I cannot speak the name
of the place. You understand how the enchantment
works, I think? The Dark Lord is satisfied with the
information I have passed him on the Order. It led, as
perhaps you have guessed, to the recent capture and
murder of Emmeline Vance, and it certainly helped
dispose of Sirius Black, though I give you full credit
for finishing him off.”
He inclined his head and toasted her. Her expression
did not soften.
“You are avoiding my last question, Snape. Harry
Potter. You could have killed him at any point in the
past five years. You have not done it. Why?”
“Have you discussed this matter with the Dark Lord?”
asked Snape.
“He … lately, we … I am asking you, Snape!”
P a g e | 34
Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince – J.K. Rowling
“If I had murdered Harry Potter, the Dark Lord could not have used his
blood to regenerate, making him
invincible —”
“You claim you foresaw his use of the boy!” she
jeered.
“I do not claim it; I had no idea of his plans; I have
already confessed that I thought the Dark Lord dead.
I am merely trying to explain why the Dark Lord is
not sorry that Potter survived, at least until a year
ago. …”
“But why did you keep him alive?”
“Have you not understood me? It was only
Dumbledore’s protection that was keeping me out of
Azkaban! Do you disagree that murdering his favorite
student might have turned him against me? But there
was more to it than that. I should remind you that
when Potter first arrived at Hogwarts there were still
many stories circulating about him, rumors that he
himself was a great Dark wizard, which was how he
had survived the Dark Lord’s attack. Indeed, many of
the Dark Lord’s old followers thought Potter might be
a standard around which we could all rally once
more. I was curious, I admit it, and not at all inclined
to murder him the moment he set foot in the castle.
“Of course, it became apparent to me very quickly
that he had no extraordinary talent at all. He has
fought his way out of a number of tight corners by a
simple combination of sheer luck and more talented
friends. He is mediocre to the last degree, though as
obnoxious and self-satisfied as was his father before
him. I have done my utmost to have him thrown out
of Hogwarts, where I believe he scarcely belongs, but
kill him, or allow him to be killed in front of me? I
P a g e | 35
Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince – J.K. Rowling
would have been a fool to risk it with Dumbledore
close at hand.”
“And through all this we are supposed to believe
Dumbledore has never suspected you?” asked
Bellatrix. “He has no idea of your true allegiance, he
trusts you implicitly still?”
“I have played my part well,” said Snape. “And you
overlook Dumbledore’s greatest weakness: He has to
believe the best of people. I spun him a tale of deepest
remorse when I joined his staff, fresh from my Death
Eater days, and he embraced me with open arms —
though, as I say, never allowing me nearer the Dark
Arts than he could help. Dumbledore has been a
great wizard — oh yes, he has,” (for Bellatrix had
made a scathing noise), “the Dark Lord acknowledges
it. I am pleased to say, however, that Dumbledore is
growing old. The duel with the Dark Lord last month
shook him. He has since sustained a serious injury
because his reactions are slower than they once were.
But through all these years, he has never stopped
trusting Severus Snape, and therein lies my great
value to the Dark Lord.”
Bellatrix still looked unhappy, though she appeared
unsure how best to attack Snape next. Taking
advantage of her silence, Snape turned to her sister.
“Now … you came to ask me for help, Narcissa?”
Narcissa looked up at him, her face eloquent with
despair.
“Yes, Severus. I — I think you are the only one who
can help me, I have nowhere else to turn. Lucius is in
jail and …”
P a g e | 36
Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince – J.K. Rowling
She closed her eyes and two large tears seeped from beneath her eyelids.
“The Dark Lord has forbidden me to speak of it,”
Narcissa continued, her eyes still closed. “He wishes
none to know of the plan. It is … very secret. But —”
“If he has forbidden it, you ought not to speak,” said
Snape at once. “The Dark Lord’s word is law.”
Narcissa gasped as though he had doused her with
cold water. Bellatrix looked satisfied for the first time
since she had entered the house.
“There!” she said triumphantly to her sister. “Even
Snape says so: You were told not to talk, so hold your
silence!”
But Snape had gotten to his feet and strode to the
small window, peered through the curtains at the
deserted street, then closed them again with a jerk.
He turned around to face Narcissa, frowning.
“It so happens that I know of the plan,” he said in a
low voice. “I am one of the few the Dark Lord has told.
Nevertheless, had I not been in on the secret,
Narcissa, you would have been guilty of great
treachery to the Dark Lord.”
“I thought you must know about it!” said Narcissa,
breathing more freely. “He trusts you so, Severus. …”
“You know about the plan?” said Bellatrix, her fleeting
expression of satisfaction replaced by a look of
outrage. “You know?”
“Certainly,” said Snape. “But what help do you
require, Narcissa? If you are imagining I can persuade
P a g e | 37
Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince – J.K. Rowling
the Dark Lord to change his mind, I am afraid there is no hope, none at all.”
“Severus,” she whispered, tears sliding down her pale
cheeks. “My son … my only son …”
“Draco should be proud,” said Bellatrix indifferently.
“The Dark Lord is granting him a great honor. And I
will say this for Draco: He isn’t shrinking away from
his duty, he seems glad of a chance to prove himself,
excited at the prospect —”
Narcissa began to cry in earnest, gazing beseechingly
all the while at Snape.
“That’s because he is sixteen and has no idea what
lies in store! Why, Severus? Why my son? It is too
dangerous! This is vengeance for Lucius’s mistake, I
know it!”
Snape said nothing. He looked away from the sight of
her tears as though they were indecent, but he could
not pretend not to hear her.
“That’s why he’s chosen Draco, isn’t it?” she
persisted. “To punish Lucius?”
“If Draco succeeds,” said Snape, still looking away
from her, “he will be honored above all others.”
“But he won’t succeed!” sobbed Narcissa. “How can
he, when the Dark Lord himself — ?”
Bellatrix gasped; Narcissa seemed to lose her nerve.
“I only meant … that nobody has yet succeeded. …
Severus … please … You are, you have always been,
Draco’s favorite teacher. … You are Lucius’s old
friend. … I beg you. … You are the Dark Lord’s